---
author: Jake Helfrich
pubDatetime: 2024-01-24T21:00:00Z
title: Software engineering is a socio-techno… Wait, did somebody say social?
description: A little reflection on my journey through software engineering.
---
The software engineering industry is relatively young. 
And I don't mean the age of the industry itself, I'm talking about the people within it. As Uncle Bob (Robert C. Martin) has stated: "The number of programmers doubles every 5 years. That means, at any time, half the world's programmers have less than 5 years experience". I myself count as one of the new-comers.

I've done my time in University, completing an undergraduate degree in Computer Science. Throughout my journey I developed a deep passion for the field. I wanted to know it all. From the low-level concepts of hardware to the abstract ones of software architecture and design. I was invested. This drive ended up landing my first job at the tail end of my degree as web-developer. To continue feeding my hunger, I sought after any technical problem I could get my hands on within the business. Anything non-technical I simply shoved to the side, without a second thought. After all, those types of problems wouldn't allow me to become a better engineer... right? Ah, how naive I was. It has been two years since my career started, and I've just now begun to realise that our technical skills are only half the equation to becoming an effective software engineer. The other half? Well, the title says it all.

Why do software engineers build systems? And once these systems are built, why do we come back and make changes to them? Broadly speaking, the answer to these questions is: because the business we are working for has needs and they want to deliver value to their customers. It's vital to understand this as software engineers. Fundamentally our job is quite simple and can be thought of as a function: we take business problems in as our inputs, and we return software solutions as outputs. If we fail to process and understand our inputs then our outputs will be just as bad as our understanding. Of course, our ability to implement a solution is the second half to this function, but our technical skills are useless without understanding of the business and being able to solve problems.

Figuring out how an application will scale; how to optimise an application’s performance; how a distributed system should handle partial outages; how we make our system observable; or even how we implement CI/CD to automate our team’s delivery. These are all real technical problems that need to be solved. However, all these problems are ultimately created by and driven by business problems. For example, We wouldn't have scaling issues if our product wasn't gaining traction and our systems performance was fine, so why should prematurely solve it if it isn't a problem for the business yet? Our time is better off spent on a problem that the business needs solved.

We rarely build software by ourselves, typically we are a part of a team. It has been globally recognised that a cohesive and tight-knitted team is crucial for high performing teams. A team of 5 engineers with mediocre skills working together cohesively will almost always outperform a team of 5 extremely proficient engineers that act as individuals. Building these strong, cohesive teams is accomplished by being able to clearly articulate your thoughts and being able to construct ( and more importantly receive ) constructive feedback. One thing my manager has said to me in the past which I thought was worth mentioning is: "A 2x Engineer that makes all of their immediate colleagues 5x engineers is more valuable than a 10x engineer that doesn't improve their colleagues".

Don't get me wrong, having proficient technical skills are important for an effective software engineer. But one thing that I think isn't taught well to the youth (myself included) of the industry is how soft-skills; like communication skills, problem solving, critical thinking etc, are just as important. I hope this blog post was valuable to at least someone reading this and you carry on the torch to the next generation of software engineers!
